From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes, all weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist and
Scott Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number four 16
recorded live Thursday, March 20th, 2014. This
episode of Hansel minutes is
brought to you by Tellerik
empowering over 1 million developers to
create compelling app experiences across
any screen. Learn more@terik.com and
by Franklin stock makers of
gesture pack a powerful gesture,
recording and recognition system for
Microsoft connect for windows developers
details@gesturepak.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Andrew Duran about the
go programming language. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes,
and I'm chatting with Andrew Duran,
who is a developer on
the go team at Google.
How are you, sir? Good.
How are you? Lovely. Thanks
so much for taking the
time to chat with me
today, all the way from
Sydney. So I want to
understand where go as a
language fits in. Like there
seems to be a Renaissance
at languages right now. Everyone's
making a new language. Every
time I go to hacker
news, there's a new language
coming out and Google's got
dart and they've got go.
I understand that there was
a time at Google where
there are only a few
languages allowed, right? You had
a very limited number of
languages to choose from. Wasn't
it basically Java and C
plus plus, I mean, I,
I think maybe that's slight
exaggeration. Like there people have
been creating languages pretty consistently
for pretty much since computers
have been around, but so
on the Google angle, we
actually still only have a
very small number of languages
that usable by the general
engineering population. And they are
C plus plus Java Python
and go, and of course
we use Java script for
front end stuff, of course,
but those four are considered
the canonical languages. And then
we also have a couple
of sort of domain specific
languages that we've developed inside
of Google. There were sores
all for logs processing, which
is also being used by
some people outside and we
have a language specifying monitoring,
configurations and machine configurations and
so on. So Google's always
been a place where we've
been on afraid of creating
new languages. So it's kind
of natural the way we
should see a couple coming
out. What's interesting about open
source projects that Google is
effectively sponsoring and putting a
lot of engineering effort behind.
And so they're not just
for Google to use, but
they're really for everyone to
use. And we sort of
hope that particularly in the
case of Gara, that we
can kind, I guess, philosophically
Rupert some people's assumptions about
what's necessary and expected from
a programming language. And so
what do I mean by
that? Well, one thing that
people, when they look at
Gore, Should I, should I
talk about what go is
in general? Well, let's, let's
talk about that. Like go
as a language that solves
what problem, like, why, why
go and why now? So
you're to give her A
bit of background on where
go came from. It was
developed by a small team
of people, Rob pike, Ken
Thompson, and Robert Greasimer, who
were engineers at Google and
had been there for, I
guess, five or six years
at the time. And this
is when Google was about
six or seven years old.
And so they were accustomed
to building services at Google,
mostly in C plus plus,
and some Java, I guess,
and Google is basically a
large C plus plus code
base and a pretty substantial
Java code base with Python
and the other languages, a
distant kind of third and
so on, but only a
really small fraction of the,
the services built at Google
require the kind of control
that you get with C
plus plus like Sables pluses,
a fantastically powerful language, but
it also requires you to
think about a lot of
stuff. It's also a very
complicated language. And so even
if you're writing something really
simple, like a, like a
web app, for instance, or
a command line utility or
something like that, you still
need to think about memory
management and you still have
to deal with many, many
aspects of the building build
system and language. And so
on that, you know, if
you're using Python or Ruby
or something like that, you
it's a lot easier, you
know, it's, you can just,
those dynamic languages mean you
don't have to think about
the type system and you
can just kind of write
what you mean, and then
it comes out and it
works, but sort of in
the culture of Google, where
we used C plus plus
for everything and to talk
to various services, you know,
you really needed to be
using C plus plus libraries.
You were kind of locked
into that approach. And it
was very hard to argue
that you could use Python
instead because Python doesn't really
give you control of a
memory it's generally very inefficient.
So it really limits what
it's useful for even, even
though it is more fun
to use. And so the
question was really, you know,
can we have a language
which is as easy and
it's fun to use as
these newest scripting languages, but
that still gives you enough
control to do things, you
know, the sensible way, the
efficient and so go is,
is that language go is
basically, you could look at,
go as starting off with
C and taking away a
lot of the dangerous man
manual memory management stuff, and
then re reexamining the top
system and just putting in
there what is necessary and
then adding some concurrency and
adding a few other nice
things. And so what you
get is a language, which
is as fun to use
as a scripting language, but
it gives you type safety.
It gives you, you know,
efficient runtime performance. And so
it kind of sits in
this middle ground between what
we consider lower level system
languages and scripting languages. What
do you think it is
that makes a language fun?
I, and I'm sure everyone
has their opinion, and that's
a very objective and I
don't particularly find CNC plus
plus fun. I certainly don't
find C plus plus fun
anymore. C plus plus represents
frustration to me. Yeah. I
mean, I think a language
is fun when you can
think about something and then
you can just ride it
out the way you think
it should work. And that,
that works and fun is
also being able to experiment
quickly so that you can
take something and, you know,
quickly change the way that
works quickly, you know, try
out a new idea, a
new interface that you think
might be better without having
to go back and, you
know, reef go on some
big yak, shave refactoring mission
to do that. And I
guess, you know, part of
the reason why go is
fun is that it was
designed for, for scale. It
was designed for this to
be working on really, really
large code bases with really
large numbers of programmers. And
that design philosophy kind of
caused us to put less
complexity into the language itself.
So it has this much
smaller set of features compared
to most, most mainstream languages.
And as a result, you
can really look at any
code and really understand what
that code does even on
a superficial reading. So you
don't need to have a
lot of context to really
understand part of a system.
And that property for working
in the lodge translates really
well into fun at the,
in the small. So if
you're working on your own
personal project, you know, if
you decide that, you know,
you want to fundamentally change
the, the core interface of
your program, it's just a
bit of search and replace
that's required. It's not, it's
not a full on sort
of, you don't have to
go around and fix all
your inheritance hierarchies or whatever.
And yeah, so that's kind
of on the type system
side. The thing that makes
it fun in another way
is that it's concurrency system
lets you model concurrent problems,
which are generally the type
of problems we deal with
in network environments. Like we're
writing web applications and so
on. And it lets you
deal with them in a,
in a pretty natural way,
in a way that's generally
safer than the approaches that
you might take in sort
of more traditional thread based
environments. Is it, is it
from a concurrency perspective, it
introduces a number of concurrency
related syntax and types to
support that. Is it, is
it upleveling things or is
it just taking the knowledge
of the last, you know,
many years of people trying
to solve these concurrency problems?
And like you said, pairing
it down to just what
is needed Concurrency approach is
inherited from a series of
languages that Rob pike worked
on at bell labs among
them, a new squeak and
LF. And they had a,
a CSP based concurrency model,
which is a, a message
processing concurrency model, which I
guess people would be kind
of familiar with from Earl
Lang, but goes take on
that as a bit different
And CSP is communicating sequential
processes just for folks that
may not know that. Yeah,
that's right. That's, that's also
channel programming, right? Yeah. Yes,
exactly. So go's approach to
concurrency is, is at a
language level. It's not a
library support level. It's, it's
basically, you know, you can
write a function or a
closure, a function closure and
put the key word, go
in front of that and
then have that run in
another thread. Well, I say
thread, I actually mean I
go retain, which is a
kind of light white thread,
like a green thread managed
by the go runtime. So
it's not a, it's not,
it's not a threat. Like
you use the term green
thread, which I think of
in terms of Java, you
know, there's like a real
thread and then a pretend
thread. Yeah. It's definitely a
pretend thread in the sense
that I go program will
typically spin up, you know,
only as many threads as
a required to keep all
the cause humming along. But
otherwise the go program and
the go runtime has a
better understanding of the scheduling
needs of the program than
the operating system. So rather
than pushing all that work
onto the operating system, by
using operating system threads, it
just schedules the execution of
these go routines across a
smaller pool of iOS threats.
And the end result is
that you get the kind
of performance that you get
from say node JS. When
you have to ride in
a, in a blocking, sorry,
in a nonblocking callback oriented
style, but you get that
kind of performance in guard,
but you get to write
blocking code. So you just
write the code that blocks
and the go run time
knows that those are blocking
events. And so it just
reached, it just puts that
go routine into the background
while it's waiting on some
disc IO or network IO
or whatever. And then it
executes whatever the next waiting
go routine. So is this
specific to IO or because
there's the idea of running
something on a background threads
who has not to block
things. And then there's the
idea of doing something asynchronously
and letting some IO completion
port handle it in, let
me know when it's done.
Is this something you can
do with CPU intensive things
or is it only things
where you're writing to disk
or talking on a wire?
No, it is, it is
possible to do it with
CPU intensive things as well.
You can, I mean, obviously
if you have more concurrent
CPU, intensive things going on,
then you have cause to
spare, then some of those
processes are going to be
stabbed, but in general, the
Goretti schedule is a bit
preemptive. Now it used to
be totally co-operative but now
it's, it, it will preempt
the threads. So you can
just run, you know, many
parallel computations in the runtime.
We'll just sorted out. Generally.
I think the scheduler is,
is the scheduler is aware
of the network. So it's,
it's fairly tuned towards network
servers so that it can,
it can know, Oh, this
go routines waiting on this
socket. And so I know
when this socket come, when
the message on this right
on this socket is ready
that I will wake that
go retain, like that's kind
of built into the core
of the schedule. So it's
definitely more oriented to doing
IO stuff, but you know,
there's no, there's no reason
why it's unsuitable for, for
doing computations. So how does
that differ with Earline? Cause
Erling also prides itself in,
in the way that it
handles concurrency, but it's a
little bit different than the,
the, the goal model. Yeah.
So there's a kind of,
it's a fundamental difference between
enrolling in, go in a
program design kind of sense.
So in go, you write
a program that is compiled
to an executable and then
it runs as a process
and all of the concurrency
stuff exists within that process.
So you create go routines,
you communicate between them with
channels, but it's all going
on inside that, that one
process, if you want to
communicate between processes, then the
expectation is you have some
kind of infrastructure to do
that. Like an obviously system,
some kind of naming name,
resolution system, and so on.
And you know, we have
those things inside Google, there
exists other solutions for that
outside of Google. But in
Erlangen, they have this really
powerful VM system where Earline
processes a much smaller and
a typical airline program are
consist of many of these
processes that communicate through message
processing and in an Erling
program, the expectation is that
any of those processes can
fail at any time. And
you design your program such
that, you know, you expect
these things to fail and
you gracefully recover when messages
aren't delivered and so on,
but in a go program,
you know, the other go
routines must be running because
you're running because you're all
running within the same process.
And so if you send
a message to another girl
routine, you know, that message
has been received because you
are still alive speaking from
the garbage perspective. And so
those two kind of represent
fundamentally different ways of thinking
about concurrent programming. I guess
one of them is, you
know, you expect things to
fail and you just plan
for failure all the time.
Whereas the other is you
kind of program with the
expectation of success at the,
at, within a single process.
And so they're really, even
though the message crossing property
is, is common to align
and go the way you
use each language is really
very different. And the runtime
performance of both is quite
different. And you know, the
deployment story is obviously very
different with go, you just
ship a single statically, compiled
binary and run it with
Erlang. You have to set
up your, your VM and
so on and administer that.
And there are positives and
negatives, I think, to both
approaches, but go is a
much more traditional approach in
the sense that, you know,
you write a program that
runs as a process on
a machine somewhere. And then
if you need a cluster,
then you run many processes,
but you know, you need
to build out the infrastructure
between those things kind of
gives you that stuff free,
but then it also locks
you into that model as
well. So we may not
have explained kind of fully
what the kind of runtime
environment is. I mean, we,
we think of runtime today
in 2014, I think people
think about virtual machines and,
you know, via, you know,
Java, VMs and CLRs and
things like that. They're not
used to thinking about runtimes
in the context of like
the sea runtime is go
running in a virtual machine,
or is it more like,
see where it is? Its
own universe? No. So go
is go. Programs are just
compile to statically linked binary
is that our machine code.
And so there's no VM,
it's not interpreted in any
way. When I speak of
the runtime, the runtime is
essentially a object that's linked
in to that binary that
does things like memory management
and the scheduling of go
routines. And while it's a
part of every go program,
it's not something that runs
the go program. It's more
something that facilitates the go
program. If that makes sense,
it just kind of does
the things the go program
needs it to do. It's
like a base foundation library
in a way in, in
that regard, the fact that
go is compiled to machine
language. You really, there's a
really nice property that when
you write some go code,
and then if you look
at that assembled machine code,
the assembly code, there is
actually really similar to the
GOCO that you wrote. There's
not these kinds of levels
of indirection between the card
that you write and the
code that's executed on the
CPU. And so as a
result, you, you actually do,
it feels like you have
a lot more control over
what the machine is actually
doing when compared to using
interpreted languages or machine languages
that run on a VM.
Can you drop down any
lower? Is there like the
metal or is go on
the metal? Like, can I
call see libraries easily? Yeah.
So it's, well, for one
thing, you can write a
assembly as part of your
go packages and it will
just get LinkedIn. So you
just write your function, a
function specification, and then you
have an assembly file that
implements that function. And that's,
that's quite easy to do.
If assembly is a bit
too low level, you can
just link against C code
and there's a tool called
CGO or Sego. And it's
quite nice because you, the
mechanics of it are pretty
clever. You, you just ride
a normal go file and
you import a magical C
package like with a capital
C and you put a
comment above the import declaration,
which is, which actually contains
the C code. You want
to link into your go
code. So you have UFC
include lines, any C type
declarations or, or function declarations
that you might need. And
then in the go package,
you can refer to any
of the names in the
C namespace, just by saying
C dot for where Fu
is some name that exists
in, in your C libraries.
And there are a bunch
of helper functions for converting
between go types and C
types. And so writing a
rapid go rapper libraries for
C libraries is really straightforward.
You don't even really need
to be a safe programmer
to do it well. And
w are so go apps,
make no promise to be
portable, right? If I'm going
to be doing things like
C library linking in and
in line assembler type things,
I would, I compile to
a particular distribution of Linux
or compile to windows. And
then that go program only
works on that operating system
Actually go is quite portable.
If you only use go
the language, I mean, sorry,
if you want to use
the bicycle or distribution. So
the basic standard library and
so on, we've gone to
great lengths to make sure
that you can use the
same standard library on windows,
on Linux, on iOS 10
and our other supportive platforms.
So while it's not compile
once run anywhere, it is
right once and then compiled
to any of those targets.
When you, when you introduce
assembly, obviously, you know, if
you only provide assembly for
64 bit Intel processes, then
it's only going to run
on those processes. But it's,
it's very easy. We have
a nice convention for providing
alternate implementations for different architectures.
So if you know the
assembly for arm or, or
three 86, you could write
that. But when it comes
to C libraries, it's a
little bit more complex. Basically
the short story is that
if you're using a C
library and you go program,
your go program is only
as portable as that C
library is. And so recently
I've been working on an
audio synthesizer project and I'm
using a library called port
audio, which is, Oh, it's
go port audio, which is
a go wrapper around the
sea port audio library. And
port audio is as the
name suggests a portable in
a library for talking to
audio interfaces, like your sound
cut and your computer. And
that, that actually runs on
iOS 10 Linux and windows
because that's where port audio
runs. And yeah, it just
works. So that's, so it
can actually still be very
portable, even though, you know,
you are dealing at a,
at a lower level than
some other high level environments.
Nice. It is as portable
as what you're using is
portable. That's cool. Yeah, it
definitely doesn't get in your
way. One of the things
I thought was a significant
about go from a getting
Mindshare perspective is that the
famous author, Bruce echo, who
was on the ANSI standard
committee for C plus plus,
and he wrote thinking in
C plus plus has said
that the complexity of C
plus plus is no longer
justified vis-a-vis productivity. He says,
all the hoops that you
have to jump through and
all the hassle is just
is a waste. So here's
someone who's, you know, career
is on all about C
plus. Plus who's saying that,
you know, go makes more
sense for the class of
problems that C plus plus
was intended to solve. That's.
Yeah, I mean, I wouldn't
disagree. I think there are
a lot of people, obviously
I'm biased, but I think
there are a lot of
people who, you know, really
good at and proficient at
C plus plus, and it,
and it works for them.
But I think on balance,
there are fewer and fewer
problems that C plus plus
is really well suited to
today, given the alternatives that
exist. And I think go
is one of those alternatives,
for sure. What is a
class of problem at Google
or that you've worked on
where go just really slid
in and was just the
perfect solution and doing it
and go was so much
more of a joy than
it would have been. Had
you done it in another
language? One example that jumps
out at me is there's
a download server that serves
dl.google.com. So it's a solo
foul, Android and Chrome and
Google earth and other big
kind of binary downloads. And
so basically it's a static
file server, but it's a
little bit more complicated than
that because there's a whole
lot of business logic that
dictates, you know, which files
should be served, where, and
when, and also it needs
to talk to our backend
storage system. So it's, obviously
you can imagine we don't
just have the files sitting
on a, on a, a
62 partitions, somewhere on some
Linux box. We have our
distributed storage system. And so
we have this, the, the
download, the, the architecture of
the downloads of is basically
there are many of these
processes running across several data
centers. And when a request
comes in for a particular
file, it will fetch that
file from the, the backend
storage system and serve it
out to the client. But
it also does a level
of caching where within a
given cluster one, these processes
kind of form a distributed
cache together, caching chunks of
each of those files. And
then each of the processes
also has in it, a
hot cash. So that any
particularly in really high demand
file will be cashed in
each process as opposed to
across all of them. And
so like this to, to
make this work well, Brad
Fitzpatrick wrote a library called
group cache, which is now
an open source project. You
can get it from github.com/
slash group cash. And
it does all of that
caching layer for you in
go. And the actual library
itself is really nicely designed.
It's a really nice example
of using goes interfaces to,
to design a really nice
API, but basically that project
was a rewrite of a
C plus plus program. And
the rewrite really played to
all of those strengths. It's
uses concurrency heavily. It uses
interfaces heavily, and the end
result was significantly shorter. I
think it was like a
quarter of the number of
lines. It was much more
well tested. Cause the first
thing I did was write
a whole lot of nice
tests and it ended up
being really high performance, actually
deploying that, which happened quite
a while ago, helped us
find some hotspots in the,
in the runtime performance and
the, and the compiler as
well, so that we could
tune go as a result
of that experience. But that
really, that really came together
really, really nicely. And there
are other projects that Google
in a similar vein where
go has just slid in
and really been a perfect
fit like that. I can
talk, I can talk about
another example, which is also
opensource is my sequel load
balancing and sharding system called
Vitesse, which YouTube use very
heavily. So if you load
any YouTube page, it goes
through this go program and
that's a project that's been
ongoing for a couple of
years. And they're very, very
happy with how it goes,
work for that. Yeah. This,
the one that Brad Fitzpatrick
worked on that it replaced
not only Python and C
plus plus, but you said
it got much smaller. It
starts up faster. It was
just a perfectly suited thing.
There's a great talk that
he gave at Oz con
in 2013. And I'll put
in the show notes. People
can get that powered by
go download.google.com slide deck, where
he goes through it and
shows you examples of C
plus plus here's what it
wasn't C plus plus. And
here's the equivalent code and
go look how much easier
it is to read and
a lot less moving parts.
It's pretty slick. Yeah. And
the, you know, the group,
there are other people outside
Google now using that group
cache library that we opensourced.
And yeah, it's a really,
it's a really nice general
general solution to a problem
that a lot of people
have. So where do people
go? No pun intended to
do check out, go Lang
and, and, you know, work
with it immediately get started
with it. Visit girling.org. There's
a download link on the
front page. You can also
take a tour of go
from there or just go
to tour.org. And then you
can learn, go from your
web browser and you can
play with go code snippets
and run them from the
browser and learn all of
the aspects of the language
effectively. Nice. No download necessary
to play with. Go. Yeah,
that's right. Very cool. Well,
thank you Andrew, for chatting
with me today. My pleasure.
This has been another episode
of Hansel minutes and we'll
see you again next week.